Add docs for hashicorp.vault integration test setup (#70)
ansible-collections/cloud-content-handbook: ContentManagement/hashicorp.vault/set_up_integration_tests.md

# Guide: Setting Up Vault for Integration Tests

> This guide walks through **end-to-end setup**: signing in to HashiCorp Cloud Platform, creating a dedicated namespace, enabling secrets engines and AppRole, defining ACL policies, issuing AppRole credentials, wiring **GitHub Actions** and **Bitwarden**, verifying access, and **running integration tests**. Use it for a **greenfield** cluster or namespace (for example a new HCP Vault Dedicated environment) or when **replacing** credentials and aligning Vault, CI, and team storage.

Reviewer: It would be helpful here to clarify when or why you would be configuring a greenfield cluster or namespace - is the expectation that you create a greenfield cluster or namespace any time you run integration tests for Hashi.Vault? Is this something you'd do _only_ in the event that you are troubleshooting existing integration test problems?

For **adding** a single new secrets engine or policy after the baseline exists, use [Guide: Enabling a New Secret Engine for Integration Tests](updating_integration_test_role.md).

Do **not** treat the policies under [acl-policies/](acl-policies/) as a production template; they are **broad** by design for automated tests inside an isolated namespace.

## When to use this guide

- You are **creating** the `hashicorp-vault-integration-tests` namespace (or equivalent) and standard mounts from nothing.
- You are **onboarding** a repository that runs Vault integration tests in GitHub Actions.
- You are **rotating** `role_id` / `secret_id` and must keep Vault, GitHub Actions, and team Bitwarden in sync.

## Prerequisites

- **HashiCorp Cloud Platform (HCP) Vault** or **Vault Enterprise** (namespaces require Enterprise).

> - **Admin** access to create the child namespace under your organization’s admin namespace (for example `admin/` on HCP).

Reviewer: Consider clarifying how to get permissions for this - it took me too long when I got started to find out I needed to get our PM to get my account set up.

> - **Vault CLI** installed.

Reviewer 2: Could we add a link here to a page that provides installation instructions? https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/install

- Access to the **team Bitwarden vault** used for operational backups of CI secrets.
- Agreement on **namespace path** and **mount paths** (this document uses the conventions in the table below).

## Conventions used in this guide

| Item | Value |
|------|--------|
| Namespace (HCP example) | `admin/hashicorp-vault-integration-tests` |
| KV v1 mount (default) | `kv1` |
| KV v1 mount (integration tests; `kv1_secret`, `lookup_kv1_secret_get`) | `kv1-integration-tests` |
| KV v2 mount (default) | `kv2` |
| KV v2 mount (integration tests; `kv2_secret`, `lookup_kv2_secret_get`) | `kv-integration-tests` |
| Database secrets engine (default) | `database` |
| Database secrets engine (integration tests; `database_connection` / `vault_database_mount_path`) | `database-conn-config-integration-tests` |
| PKI secrets engine | `pki` |
| AppRole auth mount | `approle-integration-tests` |
| AppRole **role** name | `integration-tests` |

Adjust `VAULT_ADDR` and the namespace string to match your environment. Placeholders below use angle brackets; do not commit real tokens or secrets.

## Policy HCL in this repository

> Canonical ACL policy definitions live as **HCL** under **[acl-policies/](acl-policies/)** (one file per Vault policy name, filename matches the policy). **Step 5** applies these files; edit the `.hcl` sources there rather than duplicating rules in this guide.

Reviewer: It'd be nice to have some sort of introduction for HCL/policy linked out for supplemental reading.
Maybe: https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/tutorials/get-started/introduction-policies

**Note:** The [ansible-collections/hashicorp.vault](https://github.com/ansible-collections/hashicorp.vault) `acl_policy` / `acl_policy_info` modules call the **legacy** HTTP API `GET /v1/sys/policy` (and `/v1/sys/policy/:name`), not only `/sys/policies/acl`. [acl-policies/acl-policy-crud.hcl](acl-policies/acl-policy-crud.hcl) therefore includes both **`sys/policy`** and **`sys/policies/acl`** paths.

From `ContentManagement/hashicorp.vault`:

```bash
vault policy write <policy-name> acl-policies/<policy-name>.hcl
```

> ## Step 1: Sign in to HCP, then create the namespace (admin context)

Reviewer 2: It could be unclear what "(admin context)" means here; maybe it would be more clear to reword this to "(admin access required)"

### HashiCorp Cloud Platform

When using **HCP Vault**:

1. Sign in to [HashiCorp Cloud Platform](https://portal.cloud.hashicorp.com/).
2. In the portal, open **Vault** and select your **Vault Dedicated** cluster (the Vault cluster used for integration tests). From there you can confirm the cluster URL (for `VAULT_ADDR`), use the Vault UI, and perform admin tasks such as creating namespaces.

### Create the namespace

> From an **admin** session (UI or CLI), create a dedicated namespace for integration tests, for example **`hashicorp-vault-integration-tests`**, under your parent namespace (on HCP, often under `admin`).

Reviewer: Specify how to do this, or link to https://developer.hashicorp.com/vault/tutorials/enterprise/namespaces#create-namespaces

> After it exists, all following CLI steps assume you target that namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After creating your new namespace, all following CLI steps assume you target that namespace.
```

## Step 2: Environment variables

Unset any stale token, then set address and namespace. Example for HCP:

```bash
unset VAULT_TOKEN

export VAULT_ADDR="https://cloud-content-public-vault-<cluster-id>.z1.hashicorp.cloud:8200"
export VAULT_NAMESPACE="admin/hashicorp-vault-integration-tests"
```

> Sign in with an **admin** method appropriate to your org (OIDC, initial root, or another bootstrap flow) so `VAULT_TOKEN` is set for the next steps. Example after login:

Reviewer: Can we specify the admin method for our org, since this documentation is for us, or do we want to avoid that for security reasons?

```bash
export VAULT_TOKEN=<admin-token>
```

**Note:** The examples in later sections assume a valid token with permission to enable engines, create policies, and configure AppRole in this namespace.

## Step 3: Enable secrets engines

> Enable KV v1, KV v2, database, and PKI at the **default** paths, and the **integration-test** mounts used by modules such as `kv1_secret`, `lookup_kv1_secret_get`, `kv2_secret`, `lookup_kv2_secret_get`, and `database_connection` (see conventions table):

Reviewer 2: Optional: A link to the conventions table section where it says "(see conventions table)" would be helpful

Treat these items as **sensitive**; use Bitwarden’s access controls your team already uses for infrastructure secrets.

## Step 10: Verify AppRole login (CLI)

Unset the admin token if you want to confirm test-only access:

```bash
unset VAULT_TOKEN
export VAULT_ADDR="https://cloud-content-public-vault-<cluster-id>.z1.hashicorp.cloud:8200"
export VAULT_NAMESPACE="admin/hashicorp-vault-integration-tests"
```

Login:

```bash
vault write auth/approle-integration-tests/login \
  role_id="<ROLE_ID>" \
  secret_id="<SECRET_ID>"
```

Capture the returned token:

```bash
export VAULT_TOKEN=<token-from-response>
```

Confirm policies on the token:

```bash
vault token lookup
```

You should see policies including `integration-tests-policy`, `acl-policy-crud`, `database-conn-config-and-roles-crud`, `kv1-kv2-secrets-crud`, `namespaces-crud`, `pki-crud`, `token-and-auth-crud`, and Vault’s **`default`** policy.

## Step 11: Run integration tests

1. Confirm **GitHub Actions secrets** from Step 8 are present on the branch or environment the workflow uses.

> 2. Trigger the integration-test workflow the way your repository defines it (for example **Actions** → select the workflow → **Run workflow**, or open a pull request that runs it).

Reviewer: Since these instructions are only for Hashi.Vault, can we specify that/clarify that here?

3. Confirm the job completes successfully and Vault-backed tests pass. If a job fails on authentication, re-check `VAULT_ADDR`, `VAULT_NAMESPACE`, `role_id`, and `secret_id` against the workflow’s expected secret names and namespace path.

> For **local** runs, export the same variables (and token from AppRole login) as your test harness expects, following that repository’s documentation.

Reviewer: Since this is for Hashi.Vault specifically, can we link out to relevant documentation here, even if it only serves as a reference point for what someone might be looking for in the event this comes up in other repos?

## Ongoing changes (new engines or policies)

> When you **add** a new secrets engine or policy after initial setup, create the policy and **rewrite** `token_policies` on the AppRole with **every** policy name still required in a single `vault write`—Vault replaces the list. Step-by-step instructions are in [updating_integration_test_role.md](updating_integration_test_role.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you **add** a new secrets engine or policy after initial setup, create the policy and **rewrite** `token_policies` on the AppRole with **every** policy name still required in a single `vault write`—Vault replaces the list. Step-by-step instructions are in [Guide: Enabling a New Secret Engine for Integration Tests](updating_integration_test_role.md).
```
Nitpick

## Quick reference checklist

| Step | Action |
|------|--------|
| 1 | Sign in to [HCP](https://portal.cloud.hashicorp.com/), open **Vault Dedicated**, create namespace `hashicorp-vault-integration-tests` (under `admin` on HCP if applicable). |
| 2 | Set `VAULT_ADDR`, `VAULT_NAMESPACE`, authenticate as admin. |
| 3 | Enable `kv1`, `kv2`, `database`, `pki`, plus `kv1-integration-tests`, `kv-integration-tests`, `database-conn-config-integration-tests`. |
| 4 | Enable `approle-integration-tests` AppRole. |
| 5 | Write ACL policies from [acl-policies/](acl-policies/) (`vault policy write …` as in Step 5). |
| 6 | Create role `integration-tests`, attach all policies in one `token_policies` write. |
| 7 | Read `role_id`, generate `secret_id`. |
| 8 | Add **GitHub Actions** secrets (`VAULT_ADDR`, namespace, AppRole credentials). |
| 9 | Mirror values in **team Bitwarden**. |
| 10 | Verify AppRole login and `vault token lookup`. |
| 11 | Run integration tests in CI (or locally with matching env). |

## Summary

> End-to-end setup means: an isolated **namespace**; default and integration-test **KV**, **database**, and **PKI** mounts (see conventions table); **ACL policies** from **`acl-policies/*.hcl`** attached to **AppRole** **`approle-integration-tests`** / role **`integration-tests`**; **`role_id`** and **`secret_id`** in **GitHub Actions** and **Bitwarden**; CLI verification; then **running** the repo’s integration test workflow. Further policy or engine changes use [updating_integration_test_role.md](updating_integration_test_role.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
End-to-end setup means: an isolated **namespace**; default and integration-test **KV**, **database**, and **PKI** mounts (see conventions table); **ACL policies** from **`acl-policies/*.hcl`** attached to **AppRole** **`approle-integration-tests`** / role **`integration-tests`**; **`role_id`** and **`secret_id`** in **GitHub Actions** and **Bitwarden**; CLI verification; then **running** the repo’s integration test workflow. Further policy or engine changes use [Guide: Enabling a New Secret Engine for Integration Tests](updating_integration_test_role.md).
```
